---
source_file: Stormfall.txt
entity_type: event
date: Palahanah 1175
era: '[[True Desolation]]'
participants: '[[Taravangian]] ([[Odium]]), [[Dalinar Kholin]]'
effects: Ascension of [[Retribution]]
world: Roshar
universe: '[[Cosmere]]'
books: '[[The Stormlight Archive]]'
---

**Stormfall** was the culminating event of the battle between [[Dalinar Kholin]] and [[Odium]] to decide the fate of [[Roshar]]. It was the result of the [[contest of champions]] - the duel Dalinar and [[Rayse]] had agreed to ten days before - and the resolution of the seven thousand year old war between [[Honor]] and Odium. After Dalinar's death, [[Taravangian]] gleefully took up the power of Honor, merging it with the power of Odium to form [[Retribution]]. He promptly unmade the [[Highstorm]], merging it with the [[Everstorm]], creating the true Everstorm, eternally covering the majority of Roshar in a blanket of clouds. This event became known as Stormfall to the people of Roshar in the following years.

## History
### Background
Since Odium arrived in the [[Rosharan system]], around two thousand years after the [[Shattering of Adonalsium]], Odium and Honor had been in conflict. They began with the conflict over [[Alaswha]] (later known as Ashyn), and then moved to Roshar. There, afraid of a direct conflict destroying the planet or even the entire system, Honor and Odium accepted [[Cultivation]]'s proposal for the three of them, binding them to Roshar and carefully limiting how they could grant power to mortals. By then, it had been nearly three thousand years since Adonalsium was shattered. As time went on, Honor attempted to recruit the help of all the other [[shard]]s he could, but was repeatedly rejected, and so felt forced to face Odium on his own. Despite Cultivation's cautioning, he created the [[Herald]]s and prepared for war with Odium.

This began an invested arms race between Odium and Honor. Odium created the [[Fused]], immortal warriors with the powers of the [[surge]]s, and Honor created the [[Knights Radiant]]. The cycle of [[desolation]]s began, and continued for two and a half millennia. Then, Honor finally was pressed far enough to actually try attacking Odium. This led immediately to the complete annihilation of [[Natanatan]], and the creation of the [[Shattered Plains]]. Horrified at the death, Honor tried harder, pushing himself, his Radiants, and his Heralds even harder. It was just fifty years later that the Heralds broke. [[Taln]] was the only one of them to die, and the other nine abandoned him to upholding the [[Oathpact]], leaving behind their [[Honorblade|blade]]s and ending the cycle of desolations. Honor allowed it, despite how his power railed against the oath breaking, as he was disgusted with himself for allowing them to be hurt so badly. Thanks to Taln's unbreakable will, this bought several thousand years, during which Honor spoke with the [[Wind]] and invested himself into Roshar, seeing and knowing the people. Finally, he faced Odium once again.

Odium was getting desperate, as his power despised being trapped in Roshar, while he wanted to hold on to it. [[Ba-Ado-Mishram]] had already been working against Odium for a few thousand years, and had taken the power at the [[Well of Control]], and was protected from his touch. Honor desperately wanted an end to the deaths of the people he'd loved, and Odium needed a resolution before his power slipped away from him. Finally, Odium agreed to never directly attack Honor (though he did not hold Honor to the same oath), and swore to one day accept a contest of champions, when the specifics could be agreed to, in exchange for Honor removing Ba-Ado-Mishram. Honor accepted the offer.

### Dalinar Kholin
Betraying Ba-Ado-Mishram was too far for the power of Honor, which abandoned [[Tanavast]], its original vessel. The Heralds were gone, and in his last moments of divinity, Tanavast showed the possibility of planetary destruction to the Radiants, leading to the [[Recreance]] and the end of the Knights. Odium was finally able to kill him, but he had made an oath to the power of Honor, the divine strength of bonds. Despite Tanavast's death, Odium was still bound. Some small piece of Tanavast was taken by the power of Honor, which pitied him, and given to the [[Stormfather]], who became a shadow of Honor. Together with the power itself, the Stormfather prepared to choose a champion. Two thousand years later, they selected [[Gavilar Kholin]], who was greedy and self-centered. After his death, they selected Dalinar, Gavilar's younger brother, who was fighting in the [[War of Reckoning]]. The Stormfather began showing Dalinar some of the [[visions]] he had created from the piece of Tanavast given him by Honor. Though Dalinar and many around him initially assumed he was going mad, he eventually realized that the visions were divine. Over the next few years, as the Knights Radiant were formed once again and the war with Odium resumed, Dalinar became a [[Bondsmith]], bonding directly to the Stormfather himself. He connected more and more powerfully to Honor, as he became a world leader, establishing a [[coalition of monarchs]], led by him and centered in [[Urithiru]].

As Dalinar progressed as the Stormfather's chosen, the war with Odium intensified. The Everstorm was created, the Fused returned, and Odium himself prepared an assault against [[Thaylen City]], home of one of Dalinar's strongest allies and one of the [[Oathgate]]s. Dalinar, along with many of his allies, prepared to rebuff the assault. Among many other things, the [[Thrill]], something with which Dalinar was intimately familiar, was used against him. Odium attempted to use Dalinar's past as a warlord, and his immense guilt over it, to convince him to give himself to Odium. Dalinar resisted, however, swearing his third ideal as a Bondsmith and opening Honor's [[perpendicularity]] for the first time. 

Through the next year, the war against Odium continued as the forces of both the Fused and Radiants grew in numbers. Dalinar continued leading the coalition, and Odium continued to try to overthrow him. Eventually, with the help of [[Raboniel]], a intelligent and ancient Fused, a force of Fused soldiers was able to capture the tower of Urithiru. Raboniel used [[voidlight]], Odium's own power, to corrupt the defenses of the tower and turn it against the Radiants. Thus began an extended occupation of the tower, held back by the efforts of [[Kaladin]] - one of Dalinar's army leaders - and some backup defenses still in place in the tower. After some time, the [[Sibling]], the spren of the tower, bonded Dalinar's wife, Navani. Navani became a bondsmith, and was able to use [[towerlight]] to fix the corruption and restore the tower to its true strength. This victory finally pushed Odium to accept an official appointment for the contest of champions; ten days later, at the top of Urithiru.

### The Contest
The next morning, Odium's ancient vessel, [[Rayse]], was killed by Taravangian, using the sword [[Nightblood]]. Taravangian took up the power of Odium, and began to plan how to win the contest. With the fresh power of a god, Taravangian quickly found a loophole in the agreement. While the contract stated that land holdings would be frozen as they were between the two armies, it only did so on the tenth day. Additionally, old laws of Dalinar's homeland, [[Alethkar]], dictated that one who held the capital of a country held the country, so whichever capitals Taravangian could take would earn him a whole country. Dalinar, meanwhile, began pursuing the secrets the Stormfather had withheld from him, as Cultivation advised him to seek the now-hidden power of Honor.

Over the next ten days, Taravangian's brilliant planning led to him successfully capturing the entirety of Roshar, save Urithiru. Dalinar chased Honor's history through the [[Spiritual Realm]], learning about the war with Odium and the betrayal of Ba-Ado-Mishram. Finally, as the moment of the contest arrived, Dalinar found the power of Honor, which was now almost desperate for a host. Thanks to his two weeks of learning and his years of growth as a person, Dalinar was finally ready, and took up the power of Honor, ascending. Unable to see any future in which Odium was properly stopped and Roshar saved, Dalinar created a moment of stopped time to think. Finally, he decided that the only option was to give up the power of Honor. The last several thousand years had been spent kicking back the problem of Odium, Tanavast working to contain him as the other shards ignored the issue. Dalinar gave up the power to Taravangian, who took it greedily, forming Retribution. He immediately began to prepare for his absolute rule, unmaking the Highstorm, folding it into the Everstorm, which he made permanent across Roshar. Thanks to last minute actions by [[Adolin]] in [[Azir]] and [[Sigzil]] and [[Venli]] in the Shattered Plains, two places along with Urithiru were able to remain free, but the storms were gone. Permanently.

### Aftermath
This event, the result of the conflict between Honor and Odium, became known as Stormfall to the Rosharan people in the years following. Stormlight no longer came regularly, as the highstorms were gone, and all were forced to pray to Retribution to receive [[light]]. The only light available became Warlight, a combination of stormlight and voidlight. The ancient bonds between Odium, Honor, and Cultivation were undone, and the shards and their spren were finally able to leave the system. However, Retribution no longer had any protection. All other living shards could no longer ignore the threat, and Retribution was forced to hide away on Roshar, taking advantage of what time he could get.

## Notes
<references />